Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, as always Ricardo Lobs.
And today I'm joined by Doctor Yaroslava Valent Tova.
She's a professor, doctor at the Department of Experimental
Psychology in the Institute of Psychology at the University
of Sao Paulo. She has research experience in evolutionary
psychology and through apology and human ethology. And today
we're talking about sexual orientation, gender expression, gender identity,
facial, sexually dimorphic traits, and the announcement of physical
attractiveness all from an evolutionary perspective. So, Doctor Valent
Tova, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here. Thank you.
So let's start then with the sexual orientation. And
I know that uh I mean, some of the
questions associated with this from an evolutionary perspective are
a bit tricky to approach and we're going to
get into that. But just generally speaking, uh what
different kinds of sexual orientations do you distinguish between
from an evolutionary perspective?
Yeah. So sexual orientation looks very simple, right? It's,
it's something very simple. Everybody kind of knows and
feels what's uh their sexual orientation, but it's not
that easy as, as you said. So we will
get into that. But yeah, so there are several
types of sexual orientation. And if we, if we
define sexual orientation as an attraction, sexual or romantic
attraction to individuals of the same uh sex or
the other sex or both sexes, then we would
probably distinguish the basic types, right? Like people who
are same sex oriented, other sex oriented or, or
both sex oriented. And from the evolutionary perspective, it
actually makes sense because uh when we observe, for
example, an animal and such as uh a Capucci
monkey, for example, that are very common over here
in Brazil, we have them on the campus over
here, so we can observe their sexual behavior. And
uh we can see if actually female is mating
with a female or female, is mating with a
male or uh she's mating with both uh at
some time of, of her life, for example. So
we might categorize them, right? As animals who are,
who, who prefer uh same sex sexuality or, or
other sex sexuality or they prefer both sexes or
they don't distinguish, actually, they don't have really a
clear preference. So in human animals, it's actually quite
uh quite similar. So we can distinguish them uh
if people prefer mating with individuals of the same
sex or, or the other sex, usually we describe
them as homosexual or heterosexual. We can also uh
from the evolutionary perspective, we actually do this uh
distinction because we want to see if uh individuals
mate with reproductively uh adequate individuals, which means if
they can reproduce or cannot reproduce. Right. So, of
course, if there are two sexes, it is possible
to uh reproduce to have offspring. Not always, of
course. Right? Most of sexual activities, even heterosexual activities,
they are non reproductive, which is actually very important.
But uh basic, the basic distinct uh distinction is
probably this one, but of course, there are many
others, right? How can we, for example, distinguish bisexual
individuals? So these individuals are people who have the
same degree of attraction uh toward both sexes or
who are these individuals? Because a person can have
uh quite uh predominant attraction to women, for example,
but a little bit of attraction to men. So,
is this person right? Predominantly uh Gyno Philly, which
means preferring women as sexual partners or uh is
it a bisexual individual who actually has different degrees
of attraction to both sexes? And of course, there
is uh there are people who uh focus more
on gender identity than, than sex, biological sex. So
people can be actually attracted to individuals who identify
as men, women or any other gender identity like
gender fluid people or non, non binary individuals or
uh or others. So, uh there are many possible
distinctions and of course, it also depends what we
are asking actually, right, what we are measuring in
sexual orientation because so far it looks quite easy.
Oh, I'm heterosexual. I'm bisexual, but actually maybe I'm
a little bit of both and how can I
say that? So usually we actually uh we use
a scale, right? We don't OK. OK. In some
research, we use actually, how do you identify ourselves?
So we are asking actually about their um identity
of sexual orientation. So people can use their known
labels in the given culture or uh given period
of time. So nowadays, for example, in western societies,
people may say that they are heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual
pansexual, right? Who have all these like attractions to
anything possible or or possible gender constellations or they
can be asexuals, for example, right? Which also is
probably a sexual orientation, although it's on zero levels
of sexual attraction, which means that asexuals wouldn't feel
any sexual attraction to anyone. And this is also
very interesting from the evolutionary point of view because
these individuals probably won't uh reproduce at all. And
um yeah, so mostly we ask about sexual orientation
on a scale, right? So imagine a scale from
zero which is exclusively totally heterosexual to uh to
six, which would be completely totally exclusively homosexual. But
there are some degrees between these two extreme points
and it's by the,
by the way, sorry to interrupt you, would this
be the Kinsey scale?
Yeah, this would be actually the Kinsey scale that
we use already from the forties, right? So it's
been some time by now. Of course, there are
many variations of this scale. So we can ask
about how is your uh orientation? So you can
say that you are either exclusively homosexual or heterosexual.
But in many cases, we don't even use these
labels because people actually do not want to label
themselves. So we ask on a scale on a
seven point scale, what is your attraction toward women?
None at all or extreme, for example. So we
can adjust these scales and we can ask the
same person about their attraction to men and women
separately. So we can see actually what is the
degree of both attractions, which, which is very interesting
and it seems that these uh scales actually they
make sense for people. And also also for scientists
because for example, if you are a zero, which
means like completely exclusively heterosexual, you might have different
kinds of uh behaviors or uh psychological traits, then
person who labels themselves as as one, for example,
who would be predominantly heterosexual but has a little
bit of homosexual tendencies or feelings. So these people
may have different sexual strategies and different sexual behaviors
and even they might be actually more different than
the rest of the scale. So it is actually
important to see small, more sensitive differences between these
people. And of course, I told you that uh
we can adjust these scales. It depends on, on
the aim of the research, right? What we are
actually asking about sometimes we can ask about behavior
of the person. So sexual orientation of course, has
lots of dimensions, right? And it depends on, on
the end aim of specific research, what we are
asking about. So for example, if I want to
know only about uh the person's sexual behavior so
far, I would ask what kind of partners sexual
partners they had so far, right? So males, females,
both or other genders, for example, but of course,
uh this doesn't tell me much about their desires
and tendencies and preferences because our behavior can be
different from our preferences. We can do sexual behavior
for many reasons that are not really our preferences.
I can prefer uh females as a sexual partners.
But for many reasons, for example, religious regions or
reasons I can do or for money, for example,
I can do sex only uh with males, right?
So actually our preferences and and sexual behavior is
quite different. And so, and this complicates also the
definition of sexual orientation. So, what are we actually,
how are we oriented to other people? Are we
oriented uh behaviorally or preferentially? Is it our desire?
What are we fantasizing about in our sexual fantasies?
What are our desires and what is in the
end our behavior? Right. So these are different. Also,
one more type would be probably asking about preferences
for short short term sexual encounters and long term
romantic attractions. And many bisexual people, for example, they
are bisexual in a short term way. So they
can imagine or they have short term sexual relationships
with people of both sexes or different genders, but
they actually form long term relationships with only one
of those categories of people. So romantic attraction is
also a little bit different than sexual attraction, right?
And yeah, and so from from the evolutionary perspective,
I don't know, I I think I said, oh,
there is also demisexuality, right? Of course, that there
are so many labels in so many categories. So
we can actually choose right, demisexuality of people who
actually need uh romantic bonding before they are able
to have sexual encounters, which is also interesting. And
um and talking speaking about measures, actually, I was
talking about self reports, right? Usually we use self
reports, of course, it's easier we can ask people
and we can ask people online, for example, in
an anonymous questionnaire, it's fast and um we can
collect lots of data in different countries, different cultures.
But there are other measure measures such as physiological
measures, for example. Uh SO for example, people can
use measures such as eye tracking, right to see
where our eyes actually are looking at. And we
can present different kinds of stimuli like uh naked
men or naked women or or other gender identities.
And we can see the possible differences between self
report and where the eyes are actually looking, right?
Because sometimes we think something we we we self
report one thing but our body uh plays a
different game. So we can see that people uh
that people can be actually looking a little bit
differently. For example, heterosexual men, women or women who
identify as heterosexual, they have this tendency to look
at both uh men and women uh or male
and female stimuli at the same time on the
same level, basically. So their eyes, they more, more
bisexual than their minds. And so it would be
the same, for example, with uh with genital arousal,
there are uh interesting studies on genital arousal also
showing different kinds of stimuli to people and measuring
their uh their genital arousal. So uh there are
quite interesting patterns in men who are more aligned
with their self reports, their penises are more aligned
with their self report. So they actually they are
aroused by what they really think they are aroused
while women, women have more bisexual pattern again. So
this is also interesting and these are different dimensions
of of sexual orientation. None of them is more
important than the other, right? Behavior is very important.
Feelings are important. Romantic attraction is important, sexual arousal
as well or other physiological measures. So, ideally, we
should be measuring all of those but sometimes this
is impossible, right? Also in in the research of
uh of other animal species, we can't really ask
them, right? How do you feel? What is your
sexual attraction? We can observe more their their behavior
or do some experiments to see their, their preferences
if they are, uh if they have the possibility
to mate with both sexes, for example, we can
see uh what they would prefer, but this is
more about behavior, right? We don't really know their,
their preferences or, or other attractions,
right. So, of course, there's all that complexity surrounding
sexual orientation and even more specifically in humans because
I guess that we could also talk here about
a, as you mentioned, there are some uh cultural
context, cultural inputs and all of that and perhaps
context as well. But uh I mean, from if
we try to tackle something like homosexuality from exclusively
an evolutionary perspective, uh what are perhaps some of
the hypothesis out there to explain it? Because I
guess that uh if we do it exclusively from
an evolutionary perspective, the biggest conundrum here has to
do with how we would ex explain that a
trait like that, that would uh lead or we
should or we would expect it to lead to
uh zero fitness uh would have evolved, right?
Yeah, it's a puzzle, right? But actually, I have
actually always been puzzled why people are so obsessed
uh especially within evolutionary sciences with homosexuality because really
most sexual behavior doesn't lead to reproduction. Thank God
or, or evolution or whatever. That's a and not
only in humans, right? Of course, in nonhuman species
as well, we have just published a paper about
uh same sex sexuality in capuchin monkeys. And actually,
we are showing that uh that in many species,
including humans, sexuality is mostly non reproductive. That doesn't,
this doesn't mean that reproduction is not uh beyond
all the sexual behavior, right? Of course, the the
ultimate distal uh explanation of sexual behavior is a
reproduction definitely. But reproduction also uh sexual behavior, it
also has other functions, not only reproduction, right? So
actually, one of the uh plausible evolutionary social e
evolutionary explanations about homosexuality is this actually same sex
behavior can increase bonding and cooper operation among among
individuals. Uh It has actually the same functions as
a heterosexual sex has of course, sometimes heterosexual sex
leads to reproduction. But so only sometimes and mostly
it has other functions such as pair bonding and
uh lowering aggression uh between the individuals, increasing cooper
operation and uh and um relationship quality, which can
be important for a couple, a specific couple, but
also for uh intra group dynamics, right? So actually,
if people are able to uh to have intimate
bonds with other people, they probably stick more together,
right? And this is actually very important uh for
social living animal such as uh such as humans
and uh and many other uh primates who live
together and need to defend themselves uh from other
animals or or other individuals of the same species.
So actually, um this is part of the explanation,
of course, this explanation um focuses more on sexual
behavior, not really preferences or attractions. Right. But if
uh if a person is able to bond or
have sexual relationships uh with individuals, ideally of both
sexes, then it may bring uh bring lots of
evolutionary advantages in terms of survival of the individual,
but also of the group and possibly also reproduction
because it can increase. Well, first of all, if
it increases survival, then there is more chances to
have reproduced somewhere in uh in the future, potentially.
And also it can bring other advantages such as
status, for example, right, we don't do sex only
for pleasure, but also for status, for resources, for
uh gaining lots of advantages, social advantages. So same
sex, sexuality is exactly the same, right? Bringing advantages
to the individual. But of course, there are other
uh other possibilities such as skin selection, for example,
uh that's among the oldest uh uh hypothesis about
evolutionary, possible evolutionary origins of homosexual behavior or homosexual
orientation showing really that thinking that well, this is
a puzzle, homosexual individuals obviously do not reproduce because
they only have sex with uh uh with people
of the same sex. So how come that they
exist everywhere in all populations that we know in
all human cultures that we know about in probably
all uh other nonhuman animal species that uh that
we have documents about. And kin selection might be
one of the answers, which means that um individuals
actually share their genes or their genetic components with
their uh with their relatives, right, such as with
uh brothers and sisters and parents. Of course. So
if an individual doesn't uh reproduce, reproduce themselves, they
can actually help uh significantly to their close relatives,
close kin for them to reproduce. And so, in
this way, actually, non directly, an individual can pass
their genetic uh components to the uh to the
other generation. So it wouldn't be uh an exclusive
reproduction, which means exclusive biological reproduction of the individual.
But they would actually um increase this reproductive success
of their close relatives. And through this uh through
this indirect means, they would actually pass their genes.
This is uh of course interesting. And yeah, it's
uh it's based on, on, on, on a much
broader uh theory about altruism, right? Why we actually
help others, right? From the evolutionary point of view,
there are so many puzzles, right? People are in
other animals, they behave in ways that they shouldn't
be behaving actually if um if the mathematics would
be so simple, right, survive or produce. And that's
it. But it's not that simple. Of course, in
general nature is not that simple. Only humans think
that we should simplify everything and categorize everything in
small labels, but that doesn't really work in nature.
So, altruism is also strange, why should we actually
um help other individuals and have costs uh ourselves,
right. So, so that, that, that's a puzzle, right?
Of course. And actually kin selection might be again,
the same solution, right? We are mostly helping our
kin, who with whom we share our gene. So
helping others uh who are uh who are our
family. We can actually increase our uh reproductive success.
And homosexual individuals actually can do the same. Of
course, there is not much uh support for this
uh for this hypothesis, especially in western countries. But
uh when um uh uh when the researchers went
to traditional societies with bigger families and not many
Western influences such as Samoa Island, then they found
actually that um androphy males, which means the males
who prefer men as sexual partners, they actually have
these tendencies to help their close relatives. And it's
very and more than other men, more than heterosexual
men. So and it was actually even a surprise
in, in this research and they found the same
tendencies in Mexico and in other other countries, where
is a specific kind of same sex, sexual orientation,
which I haven't mentioned before, which is more transgender,
sexual or homosexual orientation, which means that in these
societies and here in Brazil as well, um There
are biological males who actually do not identify as
men and they are not treated by the society
as men. They are also not treated as women,
they don't identify as women, but they identify as
a third gender. So in Samoa, for example, they
are called fain. And in uh Me Mexico, there
are mu and here in Brazil we have Traves
cheese. And there are actually many, many examples from
many other like completely distinct societies showing that these
uh these individuals who are biologically male, but they
have a third gender identity. They have probably some
feminine characteristics. Um AND they prefer men as sexual
partners, not not other third gender individuals, but men,
they prefer men. Sometimes they even compete with women
actually for, for, for male sexual partners. So these
individuals, they probably have a specific role in, in
the society and they also help their close kin
individuals to uh to reproduce. So, this specific um
male homosexuality may be actually transferred by uh indirect
reproduction or kin selection um theory or mechanisms. Of
course, they are different, right? They are a little
bit different, not everyone, not all uh homosexual men
are third gender, right? Even in in western societies,
there are many uh homosexual men who are quite
feminine, but there are also many homosexual men who
are very masculine, right? So, actually this hypothesis, this
skin selection hypothesis focuses more on the most feminine
homosexual men, but it doesn't really apply for the
masculine type, right. So some of these evolutionary theories,
they actually explain uh at least partly the existence
of some types of uh of sexual uh or
homosexual orientation. And of course, there are many right?
And so there's a connection, at least to some
extent between sexual orientation and gender expression, or at
least in some particular cases.
Mhm. Definitely, definitely. Yeah, we can see that there
are really uh different types of uh of homosexuals,
not only men but women also. And yeah, so
there is, first of all, there is this cross
cultural evidence, right? We have lots of research from
different uh kinds of cultures showing this third gender
uh phenotype or a third gender category, which is
very interesting. Mostly it applies to biological males uh
who are third gender. But sometimes there are also
females who can be third gender in, in uh
in India. For example, there is the whole case
of hijra who are uh mostly biological males and
they identify as, as hias and they are different
from men and women of the rest of the
society. Sometimes they are homosexual, sometimes they are asexuals.
It can be actually also AAA category for many
uh sexualities or, or gender identities. And then we
have lots of uh interesting evidence from Western societies.
When you go to a gay bar, you can
see clearly that there are some very feminine men
in, in the women ones, there are some very
feminine lesbian women who are usually called f but
there are also very masculine women who are uh
who are mostly called uh as B and uh
in men. Actually, it's also, and of course, as
I said, right, nature is more um diverse than,
than our human thinking. So actually, it's not only
that there are very feminine and very masculine, lesbian
women. Of course, there is the whole continuum and
a whole spectrum of masculinity and femininity, femininity. And
you can find uh many types of, of women,
but sometimes it's, it's really, it strikes the eyes
that there are some who are like highly feminine,
even more feminine that you would find normally on,
on a walking on a street and some of
them are really very masculine. You would even say
that they, they might be men and in uh
in gay bars for men, it's, it's the same,
right? There are some who are very uh very
feminine, they look younger and thinner and, and, and
um they behave in a more uh feminine manner
while others uh and, and these usually are called
as twins while others called as bears, they can
be more uh maybe looking like you like they
have beard than they have facial hair and they
are bigger. Actually, I don't know if you are
bigger or not. I can only see your face
but they, they prefer drinking beer and not cocktails.
And I don't know, they, they have different kind
of uh personality and behavior than the feminine gay
guys. So you can clearly see that there are
differences, there is a fantastic diversity, right? So sometimes
people think, oh, all these gay men, they are
so feminine and, and uh exaggerating the feminine role,
but it's not true. Not all of them, right?
Some of them, they probably are quite feminine but
the others are not. So it's actually quite interesting
to see. Uh FIRST the data, right? Of course,
we first need to see the evidence, what's actually
what is this phenomenon about? And then uh we
can think about possible evolutionary theories because obviously some
of them don't apply to all these possible subtypes
of uh of homosexual men and women. There is
even some evidence uh recent evidence from, from other
research groups showing that there might be different uh
developmental pathways to different types of homosexual orientation. So
uh there are different uh biomarkers actually distinguishing these
different subtypes of homosexual, specifically men. And again, uh
they are either more feminine or more masculine. So
we should probably be thinking when thinking from the
evolutionary perspective, we should be thinking about more uh
homosexual subtypes uh than only 11 very broad category,
right? And that, that actually brings us back to,
to all these definitions and measurements because we saw
already since the beginning that sexual orientation is not
that that easy to grasp and to categorize.
Uh And I mean, when it comes to non
heterosexual men, uh the as I said earlier, there's
also there, there people have also studied about certain
in certain contexts, even men who tend to identify
as exclusively as heterosexual might have non heterosexual sex
with other men. Like for example, I mean, this
first example is a bit extreme but in prisons
that happens and in certain, uh, context, like, for
example, remote areas where men might have very little
access to women or might go for long periods
of time without really, uh, getting in touch or
in contact with women. They spend lots of time
with other men due to particular economic activities that
they have. Uh, THAT happens.
Right. Yeah, definitely, definitely. Sex drive is actually quite
high. Right. It's a, it's a necessity and, uh,
and people who don't really have access to uh
to their preferred partners, they can have sex with
their nonpreferred partners that that actually happens in other
uh animal species as well. But actually, it's very
interesting. There are studies who show uh that show
that even in societies where men have actually access
to their preferred female partners, they also have sex
with men. I mean, many of them and this
number, this, this percentage is even higher than uh
it was thought uh before. So, for example, there
was one interesting study in New York showing that
basically 10% of men who identify as heterosexual, they
identify, they tell you I am heterosexual. But when
you ask them, so, and have you ever had
sex with other men? Oh, yeah. Well, I had
so 10% of these uh heterosexual identified men actually
said that they had some sexual encounter with uh
with men. And of, of, of course, New York
is quite sexualized city, right? So it may be
a little bit different or the frequency might be
different in uh in other regions. But it is
very interesting. There are other studies from uh from
other countries showing actually the same pattern that individuals
who claim, who label themselves as heterosexual. Maybe because
it's the norm in the population or the religion
says, so they actually have feelings and uh attractions
toward people of the other o of, of the
same sex. So when you ask um about attractions,
so, OK, you say that you are heterosexual. But
now imagine uh a man who would be very
physically attractive and um uh and would have prestige
and uh you would value uh this, this man
uh imagine that this man would initiate an intimate
uh activity with you. Nobody would know about it.
What would be the probability that you would respond
positively to this uh intimate or erotic uh activity?
And look, now we have different kind of numbers.
Now we get even to 30% of heterosexual men
who actually agree to have at least some prob
nonzero probability of engaging of same sex or at
least intimate activity with other men. And when we
ask women, we come up to 60 or 70%
of women who say, yeah, well, that might be
interesting. So, are we actually talking about a puzzle
of sexual orientation or are we talking about a
majority of population? Right? Sometimes it looks like, oh,
we are talking about minorities and, and homosexual people
don't reproduce. And OK, this might be really an
extreme of the whole continuum of sexual orientation. So
people who would really never have sex with individuals
of the other sex and who would really never
reproduce. But actually most people, if they have the
opportunity and if the society is open, uh then
they would actually uh experiment sexuality with both sexes.
And so this probably seems to be the most
adaptive, right to be a little bit less uh
exclusive uh in their sex in, in sexuality. Of
course, it would be probably the sexual orientation conti
continuum is a little bit skewed for, for heterosexuality.
But still, if we look on all the frequencies
of possible bisexuality, if we sum up actually all
bisexuality, tendencies and desires and attractions and behaviors, we
would probably come to the majority of the population.
So for me, there is no puzzle, no evolutionary
puzzle at all in non heterosexual orientations. And um
and also there are actually interesting studies showing that
um women who who identify as heterosexual and they
never had um sexual encounter with other women. Uh
THEY have, they reproduce plus minus 60% of women
have biological Children. When uh when we look how
many Children have women who identify as heterosexual, but
they had sexual encounters with other women. We still
are around 60% of reproduction. Uh When we look
at bisexually identified women doesn't change at all. Still
bisexual women reproduce at the same rate as heterosexual
women and lesbian women, there drops a little bit,
but we get to some 30 or 40% of
lesbian, of homosexual identified women who actually have biological
Children. So this claim that, that, that homosexual people
don't reproduce is also not completely correct in men.
Uh There it is a little bit different. Their,
uh their uh reproductive sexes really drops with, with
homosexual orientation. But again, bisexual men actually, or bisexuality
in men doesn't seem to have much effect on
their reproductive success. Uh It doesn't really increase or
decrease their reproductive success compared to heterosexual men. And
in homosexual men, uh reproductive success decreases uh up
to 13 or 15%. So uh plus minus 13%
of gay men actually have biological Children, right? So
actually, it, it, of, of course, it's not like
60% of the, of the rest of the population,
but it's also not zero. OK. So this is
also important, right? As, as I said, first, we
need to look at the data, right? We can't
really claim that homosexuals don't reproduce because sometimes they
do. But of course, uh if we look on
this specific subtype, um this transgender or third gender
homosexual subtype that we were discussing in different countries
such as Fain or Hira in, in India, they
really usually don't reproduce. It is very interesting that
I haven't found uh data on their reproduction rate
or actually, when I found it was really zero.
So there might be really different types, uh, of
homosexuals, right? Ones who really don't reproduce and they
are more transgender, right? They probably have lower, uh,
hormone levels, uh, during prenatal development and, uh, they
actually, uh, can reproduce in this indirect, um, can
help, um, way or mechanism. And then there are,
there is actually who are more masculine and who
can, or, or feminine in, um, in women who
can actually have sex with uh indi sometimes at
least uh with individuals of the other sex and
they actually can reproduce under some certain uh conditions,
right? So actually a little bit of heterosexuality, heterosexuality
among uh homosexual individuals can be adaptive. And then
little bit of homosexuality among heterosexuals can also be
adaptive. Again, we are in this beautiful bisexual continuum
and we are describing majority of the population. So
forget about all these exclusive uh heterosexual and homosexual
people. It's a little bit I I was always
thinking about this like evolutionary puzzle because always, when
you try to describe an extreme of a continuum,
it seems to be non adaptive, right? That there
is no way how to explain some kind of
extreme behavior from the evolutionary point of view such
as uh extreme autism, for example, right, this extreme
cases, uh they mostly bring disadvantages to survival and
uh social life of uh and and reproduction, of
course, sexual life of of the individuals. But actually
the whole spectrum of these traits such as sexual
orientation or uh or autism spectrum can actually bring
many uh many advantages, right? So we shouldn't probably
focus on extreme points, points when we are applying
our revolutionary thinking, we should see the whole phenomenon
and it's much more non heterosexuality or sexual orientation
in general. It's not only exclusive homosexuality.
And I mean, I guess that the one of
the main reasons are probably the main reason why
we also have this sort of very common idea
that uh exclusive heterosexuality is basically the overwhelming majority
of people out there, like 90 something percent is
also because we have very strong social taboos against
homosexuality, at least in most societies. Right. And so
it is also usual, extremely costly for people even
to express socially and even many times in anonymous
self reports, uh that they have, uh, they are
nonexclusive in their sexual orientation. Right? And that the
reps sometimes at least feel attracted to people of
the same sex.
Exactly. Exactly. Of course, that's why I said, uh,
if the so society is open, right? And people
actually have all the opportunities and possibilities, then they
would probably behave differently than in restricted society. Of
course, if you look at Iran, for example, or
many African countries, we would see really um harsh
life for uh homosexual individuals, right? In some countries,
actually, it's uh illegal, there can be even a
death penalty actually for same sex behavior. Right. So
of course, this is really costly. Nobody wants to
go to prison or uh to have other social
costs or even uh even die uh because of
their sexual orientation, right? Or nobody, most people probably
uh do not want that. So actually, in many
cases, there is this discrepancy between uh behavior and
identity and, and uh sexual attractions, people can actually
feel attraction and desire but they suppress it, right?
They suppress it and they identify as heterosexual and
they can, they can marry uh with other sex
person and they can have family and Children to
blend uh to blend in, right? In, in, in
the social, in the local social rules. Of course,
there is, there is lots of studies actually about
it and in more liberal societies, uh people have
higher tendency actually to uh identify bisexually or experiment
sexually. Uh AND see actually that their sexual life
doesn't need to be completely restricted on one specific
partner or one specific sexual position as it was
for centuries actually in, in uh Christianity books. And
right now it's, I mean, now, now it seems
funny nowadays for us, for example, living in Portugal
in Brazil and, and other countries, it, it seems
like unbelievable. But uh there were like textbooks, detailed
textbooks showing what exactly people should do sexually and
shouldn't do sexually. And from the Christianity point of
view, actually, the best would be to have no
sexuality at all. Right. So, and when there is
the the need then, OK, then you should have
the sexuality only for reproduction purposes and only with
uh a stable partner and in some specific uh
sexual positions. So uh and and some countries are
still actually following this kind of rules, very specific
rules and people are basically prohibited to express their
sexuality and sexual orientation. Of course, there is probably
fear of um uh of sexually transmitted diseases, for
example, right, same sex, sexuality is more risky in
terms of of sexuality, of um sexually transmitted diseases.
So there can be this kind of fear. Although
nowadays, we already have lots of prevention and and
also antibiotics, right, in case of syphilis or other
uh other treatment, uh treatments of of diseases that
were untreatable in the past. So actually it it
makes sense when there was a boom in Europe,
for example, in middle ages, Europe, when there was
a boom of syphilis, of course, people were scared,
right? And syphilis looks terrible when it gets to
the final stages. So they thought that people were
basically possessed by demons and uh and of course,
the cause was sexuality, right? So they should avoid
sexuality at all costs. So it wasn't like completely
um a crazy idea, right? Of course, that these
social ideas, they are adapted to the local environments,
for example, um uh epidemics of uh of uh
sexually transmitted diseases. Nowadays, it doesn't look really necessary,
right? In most societies that have access to, to
medical treatments and people are actually more free to
express their sexuality.
So let me ask you now about socio sexuality
specifically, I mean, we have these rates, some people
score lower in it. Some people score higher. The
people who score higher are basically the ones who
uh tend to prefer a higher number of sexual
partners and and committed sex. And they don't really
care much about being romantically involved with someone to
have sex with them and people who score lower,
it's basically the opposite. So uh tell us a
little bit about that and how does it relate
or if it relates in any way to gender
expression as well, like femininity and masculinity.
Yeah. Well, sociosexual, it is also quite an interesting
concept used a lot in, in evolutionary psychology research
because it's a proxy of um of measuring an
individual sexual strategy. It basically shows if the person
has the tendency as you said to hook up,
right, to have casual sex with a diversity of
partners without emotional commitment or uh if the person
is more restricted in, in their sexuality. So, uh
the person prefers actually having more commitment before uh
before starting uh sexual encounters, of course, again, right?
These are two extremes, right? Mostly most sexuality or
most strategies are not really like complete uh anarchy,
sexual anarchy, like having sex with anyone at any
time and any place. Uh And mostly people are
also not completely exclusively monogamous, only thinking about one
specific partner and being attracted to one partner during
the whole life. So most people actually fall somewhere
in between and uh they follow different kinds of
strategies. Um We actually even show that uh this
short or long term strategy, they can sometimes go
together in, in one paper, for example, we showed
we were measuring mating sexes and parenting success, which
basically follow the the rule of the socio sexuality,
right? If you have higher parenting success, then uh
you would have a tendency to secure one specific
partner uh to protect and care of uh of
the offspring. Uh WHILE if you have mating success
or if you have a mating effort, then you
would be going after lots of uh different sexual
partners and sometimes they don't go really together. Right?
Of course, if you have lots of sexual partners,
then uh it's difficult to invest, for example, in
family while uh if you have kids, then it's
almost impossible to, to run after different sexual partners.
But some people are actually able to combine these
two ST stress and uh sometimes they go together,
people can have actually both parental effort and mating
effort quite high. So it's right, for example, in
uh uh open relationships or consensually non monogamous relationships,
people can actually have a family and they can
have long term committed relationships, but they can also
at the same time uh have a variety of
sexual partners, right? Such as such as in open
relationships or, or polyamory or uh or swinging or,
or other uh other possibilities. So this is interesting
and yes, and you asked about the gender expression
or masculinity femininity. We did one smaller study actually
about socio sexuality. And we thought that people who
would be more masculine in general, men, women uh
of uh of different sexual orientation, simply people who
would be more masculine, which means uh they probably
had more testosterone or androgen action during prenatal and
postnatal um environment or development. They might actually behave
more uh unrestricted in their socio sexuality. So they
might tend to have more casual sex. But actually,
we didn't find support for, for this uh for
this hypothesis, we actually, we found support only in
women. So women who were more masculine, they really
had higher socio sexuality. They had a tendency to
have more sexual partners, they had higher socio sexual
desire and also more liberal sociosexual attitudes. But in
men, it was actually the opposite. I mean, the,
the, the association wasn't very strong, but we found
actually that men who were more feminine, they had
uh higher socio sexuality. But actually, this can be
uh because of this association between sexual orientation and
gender, nonconformity. Of course, I I told you that
there are different types of, of homosexual men, some
of them are masculine, but on average, they are
actually more feminine and it can be it is
possible that it's not really the femininity per se,
which makes them more unrestricted sexually, but it's more
their sexual orientation. Because when, when I looked at
different data from more than 15,000 individuals in, in
different different studies um from, from different populations, actually,
the pattern was quite clear that in men, uh
socio sexuality increases linearly with their non heterosexuality. So
the more he is non heterosexual, the more he's
getting to homosexual end of the continuum, the more
he's uh socio, sexually unrestricted, he has a tendency
to have more sexual partners, which can be again
explained by the availability, right? If your uh preferred
partners are also men who are unrestricted, then it's
easier actually to have lots of uh lots of
sexual partners. I'm not saying that all homosexual men
are completely sexual anarchists. OK. They are not, there
are many who are demisexual and who, who are
monogamous sexually. But the, the, the correlation, the evidence
was actually quite clear in women, this didn't happen.
And what we found actually was a different uh
different graphic. Actually, it was uh a little bit,
a little bit like uh inverse U which means
that um if you look at the continuum between
exclusively homosexual and exclusively heterosexual women, they had actually
the lowest uh sociosexual scores, but bisexual women, they
were the highest. So actually, it seems that uh
socio sexuality in women correlates with their higher masculinity
scores, but also with their bisexuality. So the more
she's bisexual, the more uh partners uh she wants
to get, of course, the problem with the socio
sexuality measure is that it asks about partners in
general. How many partners, uh how many different partners
have you had during the last year? Or uh
when you look uh when you, when you meet
um a new person, uh what's the frequency you
uh you think about having sex with this person
you have just met or do you think that
sex uh without love is? Ok. But it doesn't
really uh ask about the sex of the other
person. Right. So actually, we don't know in bisexual
people, if this higher socio sexuality in women specifically,
it's because they are more unrestricted, unrestricted with men
or women. So that's still a question maybe with
both, right? Of course, because they have the opportunity.
Right? Yeah, that was crazy. I,
I, I mean, it would also seem intuitive that
people who are bisexual would also feel attracted to
a higher number of people because since they are
attracted to people from both genders, I mean, there's
more people out there to be attracted to than
if you're just attracted to the opposite sex.
Right. Exactly. Exactly. And there is the advantage, look
at it is the sexual and evolutionary advantage. You
can basically have sex with anyone. Right. Of course,
I'm not, again, I'm not saying that bisexual people
are like completely uh unrestricted and uh, and they
have, um, they are nymphomaniacs basically, but they have
higher opportunities. Right. Of course. And maybe nowadays actually,
uh, it seems that the mating market is bigger.
Right. Because of all these tinder and, and other,
uh, other apps, sexual basically apps. But actually it's
not that easy. It seems that actually people are
using these apps. Exactly, because they are unable to
get sexual partners. Right. It's not that easy actually
to, to find sexual ava available sexual partners to
flirt with them and to, to initiate the first
contact, it's not that easy. Of course, it's the,
it's the whole process involved in it. And for
some people, this can be actually much more difficult
than for other people. There are even some studies
actually showing that Tinder is used more by more
timid people, right? People who are uh actually a
little bit more shy. They um they, I do
not know how to, how to initiate a conversation
with an unknown, attractive uh person. So it's not
that easy and uh socios and imagine a person
with high socio sexuality, high desire for a variety
of sexual partners being shy on Tinder, looking at
all these possible uh potential partners. But basically, I
don't want to do the first contact, especially in
person. Right. So, yes, there are many problems that
and mismatches, right? Of course, when we are talking
from the evolutionary perspective, we haven't really evolved with
Tinder and with online dating. I'm not saying that
it's completely incorrect, but it's obviously different than uh
what humans evolved. So we need to also think
about mismatches and it seems that people actually spend
lots of time on dating apps and they are
trying to find parts partners. But there is a
large proportion of um involuntarily single uh individuals who
are actually unable to find and who are not
happy alone. Right. They won't actually sexual partners or
even romantic long term partners, but they are unable
simply to find ones in one of the cross
cultural studies that we did. Um WE also found
in uh it was, I think in eight or
nine different countries. I don't know, most of my
research is a cross cultural and I don't remember
anymore in how many countries each study. But it
was a nice study study showing actually that uh
more than half of our sample in all studied
countries was actually single and a great percentage of
these single uh people like 15 or 20% of
these single people, they were actually involuntarily single. So
these are people who actually suffer being single, right?
Of course, I'm not saying that that being coupled
is the best thing ever. Of course, there are
people suffering in long term relationships as well, obviously,
but there are also people who are suffering being
single. Some of them uh they don't, right. Some
of them, they are single because they want to
be single, they do not want to commit to
a single partner or have a family and they,
they want to have career and, and they want
to travel and be free and whatever. So they
are happy actually to be single. But a great
percentage of people actually have active problems attracting individuals
exercising their socio sexuality, their sexual desires and their
also their romantic desires. And in the end, they,
they are actually staying for a long time, involuntarily
single and not only men, women as well.
So let me ask you now about a particular
trait that men and women or, or, I mean,
particular traits associated with the face specifically that men
and women might find attractive in the opposite sex
in this case. So in what ways are human
faces sexually dimorphic?
Hey man, what is there is actually there is
the uh morphological uh sexual dimorphism. Uh When you
take um the skulls of uh females and males,
uh you can actually see average differences in their
uh cheek bones, for example, that are usually bigger
in, in women than in men. Uh THESE uh
brow ridges which are bigger in men than in
women. Men usually have bigger chins uh than women.
Uh There is this uh the ratio of um
length um and uh wideness of the face, which
is also different men usually have wider faces while
women have longer faces, right? Uh In the ratio
of o of the wideness and So there are
many differences, of course, facial hair, for example, looking
at you, you have, you have a beard and
most women actually do not have beard. And, um,
actually some populations in Japan, actually not even men
have beards, right. This is interesting, some population are
completely beardless, uh, even in men. But anyway, so
there are some populations that are more sexually dimorphic,
uh, than other populations. And we didn't really expect
this, uh this result, we were collecting also uh
data from different countries. And again, I don't remember
again to all of the countries. But we had,
uh we had two or three African countries. We
have uh Middle East countries, we had India, uh
Vietnam, Czech Republic, Brazil and probably others. And we
basically found that uh we found these average morphological
differences between men and women in all these populations.
But there was a variation and we actually found
that the European and South American populations are the
most sexually dimorphic uh populations uh while African populations
were the least sexually dimorphic. So this is very
interesting, right? Of course, that uh that preferences for
sexual dimorphic traits has been studied for decades by
now. So everybody knows already for lots of, from
lots of studies from different populations that individuals prefer
feminine, uh morphological features in female faces, which is
also what we replicated in all the studied countries.
But there has always been a problem with male
masculinity because women actually do not always prefer masculine
men, sometimes they do, sometimes they don't, sometimes they
have no preference at all. And in this new
study, we also didn't find any specific preference for
uh male masculinity. And this is interesting when we
look at this uh this variation in uh in
morphology around the globe. Right? Of course, unfortunately, most
of the studies are restricted to one specific population
and we are basically only starting uh cross cultural
research for me as an anthropologist originally. Uh THIS
is very interesting right to see this variation among
different populations. And I, I wouldn't say that it's
cultural um uh variation. It's really very, it's much
broader variation. It's really between populations. And we don't
know which factors actually contribute to this variation. It
can be ecological factors, right? Of course, we don't
know how uh um how these factors uh like
uh humidity or temperature. For example, where people are
developing their uh their sexually secondary uh characteristics can
influence uh this development. We have no idea. We
are just starting actually to see this, this variation.
And I think that we are actually basically in
almost in the end of this opportunity to, to
study different di diversity in different populations because soon
people will, will mix so much, right? And we
are already migrating so much. Look at me, right?
I, I came from the Czech Republic and I'm
here in Brazil. I think that uh I, I
even saw one study actually showing uh a small
forecast, right? Thinking about future how future humans will
look like. And it seems that they will look
like normal Brazilians, they will be simply mixed of
all possible populations. So we need to use this
opportunity and, and try to study different populations right
now, right, when they are still a little bit
different, at least some of them. So we found
this, this surprising effect of population on uh sexual
dimorphism in, in facial morphology. And of course, I
want to see more studies. I, I don't know
why this happens. Uh
BUT I mean, just to get this clear and
I'm not sure if by now, you're already able
to answer this question specifically. But if we look
into a population where there's less sexual dimorphism on
the level of the face, is it that women
uh from that population uh express less interest in
men who have more masculinize face? I mean, they
don't care about that as much or
might be, but we didn't find actually this effect.
We didn't find that uh in that study, we
asked, we measured actually the uh the facial morphology,
right? And sexual dimorphism. And we found this variation
in different countries, but we didn't find actually variation
in preferences for masculinity, not even for femininity. Actually,
all in all countries, people preferred feminine female faces.
And in all countries, we didn't actually find any
effect of, of male morphological masculinity on uh attractiveness
ratings, right. So this was actually interesting. But what
we found and the and the strongest effect actually
was Aborigines of uh or prototypical of the faces,
right. So the more average the face within the
given population, the more attractive it is rated by
the local people. So this is, this is interesting.
This can also actually explain why there are still
some population differences because in the end, we actually
like people we know, right, we are familiar with,
we grow up with and we don't really like
that much. Uh PEOPLE who look very different, of
course, there is the exotic effect, right? Sometimes people
simply like uh individuals who are very different but
in its majority, uh what actually works is the
effect of homo gine, right? That we actually like
people who like uh who look like us, right?
And not only look but who behave like us,
who have the same religion, who have the same
education, who have the same beliefs and the same
age actually mostly,
I mean, probably should also study this, but I
would be willing to bet that people who score
higher on social sex, socio sexuality would also be
the ones that prefer exotic faces because they are
different. I don't know that that's just something that
I'm putting out there. I have no idea at
all if this would be true or not. But
anyway,
but it's quite plausible actually. I think so, I
do not really have any data about this and
I do not know any research that would be
asking about it, but it's quite plausible. I think.
I agree totally with you.
So, let's talk about one last topic. Then you've
also done work on the evolutionary psychology of self
presentation modification. What is this about? I mean, when
people basically self pres or mod modify their, their
self presentation, what are they usually doing? I mean,
are there sex differences here in our men and
women do that? And what are the goals that
people have with it?
That's a good question. How many hours or days
we have to discuss this topic?
50 more minutes, I
guess. Ok. Ok. No, it's, it's really this, uh,
appear modifications. They are a fascinating topic. It's unbelievable
that people are actually modifying their appearance all the
time you asked. Well, well, all the time, basically
we have done one study or participated in, in
one cross cultural study with more than 100,000 individuals
from more than 90 countries recently. And, uh, we
asked about um, what, what uh kinds of uh
body modifications or appearance modifications people normally do and
how much time they spend with these modifications. And
it seems that in all these countries, people modify
their, their appearance, actively modify their appearance and they
spend at least on average 10 minutes per day,
uh modifying their appearance. But of course, that en
globes, lots of, uh, lots of activities. So for
example, taking a shower, using perfume, I I mean,
I even used perfume for this interview. Also nobody
can, nobody can. So now my perfume, but we
somehow do these things, right? And
maybe somewhere in the future with for the technology
or something
like this would be great. That would be really
great. That's why we do lots of research on,
on um facial and visual attractiveness and also vocal
attractiveness because it's easy, we can do it online,
we can collect uh rating. So for Chinese people
here in Brazil, for example, and it's easy but
smell is impossible. I can't really bring uh smell
of Chinese people if there is some uh over
here to Brazil and test if there is something
that we can smell out of these people. Unfortunately,
we still don't have this technology. But yeah, but
changing our smell and appearance and, and clothes actually
and the hair and everything. That's something that we
do and it seems that most people actually do
and, and people who don't, they actually have some
self grooming uh problem, right? That it's, that's uh
it accompanies some psychological issue or psychiatric issue. So
uh so grooming and uh self care uh is
something that humans do as well as other animals.
Again, it's nothing completely new. It's not an invention
uh of Western modern society that people uh wash
their hair or, or, or paint uh their, their
bodies in different ways. No painting, actually, body painting.
They are uh they have been documented in so
many cultures. And also historically, actually also some archaeological
findings actually show that people were using ochre already
100,000 years ago in many places of uh of
the world. So it's something uh that people do.
Of course, when we look at cats, for example,
or other animals, they also uh do the self
grooming all the time, right? Some, some of these
species, even all the time, there are even some
species that, that actually such as one vulture uh
which is a big bird species. And in the
zoo, the male actually doesn't do this, uh doesn't
do this behavior in the zoo. He has a
nice white uh plumage in front of the body.
But when he's in the wild, he actually finds
some, some coils or some uh some uh yeah,
well, it's, it's coils that look more orange or
red uh because they have an iron in it
and they actually the male can spend hours uh
putting this this soil into his white white plumage.
So actually he looks afterwards really reddish or, or
or orange, right? So this is very interesting behavior
and it seems that it can actually attract uh
attract sexual partners or it can increase uh status
for example, and, and attract attention in general. So
it seems that people actually do exactly the same,
right? Sometimes we are changing our appearance to look
better, right? Not always, but sometimes we do to
look better and to attract potential potential partners to
increase actually our uh desirability as a as a
partner. Uh But of course, not always, right, we
can use uh these differences or these modifications of
our appearance to again, to blend in, for example,
in our society. So for example, um uh it
would be strange to, to walk on a on
a beach, for example, in a uh in long
trousers and long sleeves, right where everybody is using
a bathing suit, for example. So in specific places,
people actually change their, their behavior and their outfit
according to the local uh according to the local
norms, it would be strange to go uh for
example, to Eastern Turkey and, and again using uh
a sh uh um sleeveless T shirt, for example,
because that's not really allowed by, by the local
society. Uh So uh there are definitely differences between
different populations. What is universal is probably this tendency
to modify an appearance. But of course, there are
local tactics, right? In, in the Western society, what
is more uh what is more attractive is, is
white teeth, for example, right? There is lots of
uh dental creams to to to do the whitening
and and lots of procedures and so white teeth
actually looks attractive and it's and healthy, right? But
actually, if you go to Eastern um Asia, to
Japan and other other countries and you know what
you're going to say
this. So you can see that, that actually the,
the, the, the pattern was exactly the opposite. They
were using also some uh specific um uh procedures
to make their teeth healthy. But actually these procedures
made the teeth black completely black. So,
and they like for, they prefer a crook, crooked
teeth. Right.
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. And this is so different, right?
This is so strange for us, It can look
even scary, actually, only unattractive but even scary. So
look at it, right? How, how uh fantastic uh
uh diversity we have in all these um all
these body or appearance modifications. So someone can say,
oh, this is cultural, this de depends on the
local culture and it definitely depends, right? And local
ecologies, for example, because somewhere I can't really find
um parrot plumage uh to decorate my uh my
clothes, for example, which would be typical for the
Amazonian indigenous people over here, right? So in Europe,
for example, there are not many parrots. So that
wouldn't work, right? So uh people usually use something
that is that is scarce, that is rare, right?
That is uh not easy to find. So for
example, that's why actually people use gold and and
and this kind of precious metals or diamonds or,
or precious stones to show their status, right? Because
that's precious, it's rare, right? Um So actually changing
appearance can also um communicate status of the person,
right? And it can change actually status. But it's
not easy, it's not easy to, to, to buy
a diamond. Right. I can't buy a diamond probably.
Right. So, the only person who really has lots
of money can buy a diamond. It's a small
thing. It's a very small uh, stone, but it
can make all the change in the status of
the person because with this signal, actually, uh they
are signaling, look, I can afford it, right? I'm
able to buy and somewhere it can be parrot
plumage, right? But it's also not easy to find
a parrot in a, in an Amazon forest and
go after it and catch it and uh and
spend lots of time and energy actually catching a
parrot, right? And the person who actually does this
does this can show look ii I know how
to do that. I can afford it, right? So
actually, uh this person is again increasing status and
attractiveness with status, right? So um appearance modification can
attract potential partners, it can increase or change uh
perception of status of the person. It can also
be rebels, right? Because of course, if I have
a better diamond than, than a Riel, then I'm
better than uh than, than the other ones, right?
And of course, uh when we look at uh
for example, social markers, right? Sometimes we use uh
appearance modification as a social marker. So for example,
here in Brazil, people are crazy about football for
some reason. And as far as I know, it's
more or less the same here in Portugal. So
we're not that, that different in that regard, at
least.
Ok. And so, uh, so it makes all the
difference if you are wearing a dress, uh, of
a fan of one specific football team. Right? So
you show actually to whom you belong to and
also you show to whom you don't belong to.
Right. So these are very important information, right? So
sometimes it's good to, if your team loses, it's
good to stay home locked and not showing your
dress and all because you might actually get some
negative reactions on the street. But that can actually
happen, happen in the whole society or a tribe,
for example. So people who are changing their appearance,
they can show look, I belong to this specific
tribe to this society and I don't belong to
the other one which is very important. If you
um if you meet someone in a forest, for
example, then you would know quickly if it's an
enemy or a friend, right?
I guess that a very good example of that
would be tattoos, right? Tribal tattoos also because it's
a very big commitment to do a tattoo because
particularly in traditional societies, you can't really ever remove
them.
That is true. That is true. Exactly. And it's
also not that easy, right? Of course, uh Nowadays
we do tattoos in tattoo, saloon, saloons where they
have all the medical and hygiene equipment but actually
doing a tattoo in Sub Saharan Africa with some
kind of needles from bones or something that is
not really hygiene. I can actually uh be a
handicap uh demonstration. Look, I have survived this terrible
procedure that made me sick for a long time,
but actually I survived it, right? My my immunity
is actually very good. So it can also actually
show the health status of the person, right? Not
only uh belonging to one specific tribe or society,
but also actually uh also health of the of
the person and there
when it comes to social identity, another example would
be body paintings,
right? Definitely, definitely, of course, body paintings are really
archaic and very old and used probably in all
possible societies. Of course, you ask if there are
some gender differences. Nowadays, we see for example, that
women usually care more about their appearance. Nowadays, in
in modern western societies, they change more their appearance.
They also do do more um uh aesthetic treatments
that might be more uh like um uh surgeries,
for example, or, or this kind of more invasive
uh uh invasive treatments. Men are also increasing actually,
in these kind of behaviors, they are also heterosexual
and homosexual men. They are also um opting more
frequently actually for changing their appearance in more invasive
ways. But actually most people, they use less invasive
and more accessible uh ways of of appearance. Change
such as makeup and, or, or hairstyle, which is
actually easy and it's reversible, right? You can actually
always change it. It's not like the tattoo, right?
Which is uh more difficult to change or, or
impossible in some, in some societies. So, uh so
most people actually opt to do this kind of
uh changes. Um It's a question actually, if uh
in the past, in some uh in some specific
societies, men were actually more uh uh uh they
had a higher tendency actually to change their appearance
than, than women. It can actually happen. We don't
really know exactly. But it's possible because it also
depends the, the, the the body modifications or appearance
modifications, they also depend on the local values, right?
So uh if this given society achieve values, uh
physical appearance or some specific physical appearance, then people
will have this tendency to change their appearance according
to them uh to the values of the local
uh society. But if the uh if the more
vize uh characteristic is, for example, social status or
wealth, then appearance doesn't matter that much, right? So
a person doesn't need to change that much uh
appearance. But it would uh the person would choose
or, or um allocate energy into uh into status
or any other uh any other characteristic that is
actually valued by the, by the local society. But
it was actually quite interesting because uh we found
in one experiment that we did with makeup in
women that, uh, women actually change their feelings about
their themselves. They rate themselves differently differently when they
are wearing no makeup versus when they are wearing
makeup. And we even tricked them. Actually, we did
a placebo in one experiment and after removing all
the makeup, they potentially had, we took pictures and
we, we, uh, filmed them and we asked them,
how do you feel? How healthy you feel? How
do you look? Right? How would you describe yourself?
Right yourself right. Now, how healthy, how attractive, how
uh what would be your age? Right? We were
even asking about their uh perceptual age and then
our makeup artist, uh she pretended uh creating uh
or developing makeup. So actually she was only using
um some creams that don't have any, any color
and, and uh brushes that didn't have anything on
it. And so she was just actually pretending she
was putting something on the faces of the women
and then they looked into the mirror and they
were like, oh, such a nice light makeup and
now I feel much better. They totally uh thought
actually they accepted that they were treated that they
changed that their appearance changed. Look at it, how,
how our expectation is strong, right? We already think
we expect that our appearance would be better uh
after uh after having makeup. And so even not
having any, we actually believe that we have and
that we improve. So their, um, self ratings actually
changed already in this stage when they didn't have
any makeup at all, but they believed they had.
So they actually thought that they were already more
attractive and, uh, they had higher self self esteem
and they felt simply better. Of course, then it
changed again when the makeup artist, uh, used a
real makeup. So they felt still better afterwards. Right.
But still, uh, this self esteem and self feeling
actually is quite important, right? Obviously, people don't even
need to use makeup to improve their own feeling,
right? But this is actually important when we think
from them perspective of attracting potential partners and and
desirability as a potential partner, actually improving uh proper
self esteem and and self ratings can help actually
much more than uh than any other behavior, right?
Because when the person actually has higher self esteem
and higher confidence than uh the first uh initial
contact with potential partners may actually start better, right?
Than when a person is too shy or, or
doesn't have the self self esteem or is underestimating
actually themselves,
right? So let me ask you one last question.
Then when it comes to specifically people enhancing their
physical attractiveness, are there specific factors perhaps specific contexts
where people uh feel more or less the need
to do that?
Yeah, that's a very good question actually. And intuitively,
it looks like that, right? We should be actually
changing our uh behavior according to the situation. And
in many cases, we are, we are, for example,
modifying our voice, right? When we are talking with
a child, uh we talk in a, in a
specific voice pitch, uh which is different than when
we talk to, to our boss, for example. So
we are changing our behaviors and intuitively, we also
thought and we hypothesized that actually people would uh
change their appearance or modify the, their appearance more
when they uh would meet, for example, their new
potential partner or if they were going to a
first date rather than going out with uh with
friends of the same sex or doing exercises, right?
But actually, we haven't found any, any difference. We
haven't found any, any, any difference that people would
do according to, to a different situation. Actually, what
we found. And of course, this was uh specifically
uh makeup usage in women, right? Of course, we
can do other kinds of modifications, which is possible,
but at least makeup in women actually didn't change
in different kinds of situations that we offer to
our respondents. And what we found was that women
either use more makeup or moderate makeup or none
basically in all these situations. So, yeah, so that
probably explains why when I was going to, to
have a very small surgery and I went with
makeup and my husband was asking me, why are
you going to the hospital with makeup? And I
was like, oh, of course, I'm using makeup. Right.
Are you crazy. How would I survive without makeup?
So, I think that actually, uh, appearance modification more
associated with, uh, with personality. Right. It's a whole
package actually of personality and of, um, more stable
tendencies that people have. Right. So it's not possible
to change it. Like now, I don't need it,
so I won't do it. It's like changing sexual
orientation right now. You should be homosexual, for example,
but it's impossible to change like that.
But what about specific contexts that might elicit higher
levels of intro sexual competition? Like for example, when
economic conditions are worse and people have to compete
more for potential partners.
There was some evidence from a few studies actually
showing that uh when the economics was actually going
bad, going really broken uh individuals and specifically women,
they actually started to spend more on makeup and,
and lipstick and, and other other appearance modifications, which
is counterintuitive, right? Because we should be spending less,
we should have money, we should be spending less,
right? But actually, it's exactly in this kind of
environment that people can increase their in intersexual competition
and fight more for uh valuable uh long term
partners, right? Who may actually invest especially um in
circumstances of low uh economic development, right? So it
is actually possible that it works in one other
study. We also asked women uh about their makeup
frequency usage and we asked about their uh self
uh self rated mate value, right? How they feel
themselves, how desirable they are as partners and about
intersexual competition. So we asked them about how you
feel when other uh woman is nearby. And um
and we actually found that women who use more
makeup, they have higher in intersexual competition scores. So
it seems and they also have higher mate value.
So it, right, so it was correlated with both
of these strategies. So they actually think that they
are more valuable but they also want to be
durable.
I I mean, this is very interesting just the
other day, I was watching a documentary from Brazil.
I think it was in the favela in Rio
de Janeiro. And uh they were showing they were
talking with a few poor people there and one
of them was a woman who basically did the
nails and makeup for other women and she was
very poor, but she just went out on the
street doing those kinds of services for other women.
And at a certain point and this is the
most interesting part. She said that she didn't think
she would ever run out of costumers even though
everyone there was poor. So
that's just
that's anecdotal evidence, that's anecdotal evidence. But it's a
very interesting thing. So
yeah, this is very interesting. But when you think
about it, makeup and nails and these things, they
are relatively cheap, right? So actually even poor people
can afford them. But they, they make a big
difference, right? They are accessible but they really make
a huge difference and there are lots of actually
studies and even experiments or uh people simply taking
pictures before and after using makeup and sometimes you
wouldn't recognize the person at all. It really makes
a huge difference. So, yeah, so this is interesting,
but of course, so this actually doesn't show the
status, right? You don't know if the person actually
used a very expensive lipstick like for $200 or
a very cheap one for like $1 or something
because the effect is basically the same, right? There
is not, not a big difference. So this is
not really a status uh exhibition, right? But it's
but but what it does is really the change
in the appearance and this can be completely decisive
actually, especially in the lives of poor people. Imagine
that the poor girl from a favela uh here
in Brazil actually changes her appearance and or modifies,
right? It's not a change of appearance. She modifies,
she adjusts an appearance. So she's even more beautiful,
for example, than she was and she can afford
to attract and richer person, for example. So she
can actually get out of the favela, she can
change her life completely by using a little bit
of lipstick or or or other, right? So this
is actually from the evolutionary point of view, it's
not only vulture and bees who are using perfumes
from different from different flowers, but also humans who
are really modifying their appearance and it can change
completely their life outcome, right? The reproductive outcome and,
and social in general. So, yeah,
so let's wrap up the interview here. But we
definitely have to have more talks on the show
because there's many more things here that uh I
really wanted to ask you. But due to the
time limit, I mean, I had to restrain myself
here. But uh if people are interested, where can
they find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, they can find me. Now, my students actually,
they came with a fantastic idea that we should
have an Instagram and Facebook and websites. So I
told them to do it and they really did.
So now you can see uh now you can
find actually behavior evolution and sexuality lab uh on
Facebook and on Instagram. And there is also a
preliminary version of our website and of course, uh
my or our uh publications are all on, on
Research Gate and Google scholar and there is lots
of it. So you can find us finally. And
if you want to collaborate, we are here, the
land is full, people are interested and doing research
in Brazil is fantastic.
Great. So look, thank you so much again for
taking the time to do this and I really
loved our conversation. So thank you so much. Thank
you for having me. It was really fun.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H
her meal and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo,
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed
YPJ Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary
Fish, TD and W Daniel Friedman. William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams, the Augusta Anton Erickson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey
junior, Old Ebon Starry, Michael Bailey. Then spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor. Luke Neon Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine
Steinman, Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar, Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.